Closes #2395: Re-vamp of get-started page (#2402)
pharmaverse/admiral: vignettes/concepts_conventions.Rmd

outer `exprs()` wrapper.  For instance, in the `derive_vars_merged()` call below, the user is merging `adsl` with `ex` and is able
to filter `ex` prior to the merge using an expression passed to the `filter_add` parameter. Because `filter_add` accepts expressions, 
the user has full power to filter their dataset as they please. In the same vein, the user is able to create any new variables they 
wish after the merge using the `new_vars` argument, to which they pass a list of expressions containing "standard" R code.

``` {r, eval = FALSE}
derive_vars_merged(
  adsl,
  dataset_add = ex,
  filter_add = !is.na(EXENDTM),
  by_vars = exprs(STUDYID, USUBJID),
  new_vars = exprs(
    TRTEDTM = EXENDTM,
    TRTETMF = EXENTMF,
    COMPTRT = ifelse(!is.na(EXENDTM, "Y", "N"))
  ),
  order = exprs(EXENDTM),
  mode = "last"
)
```

In summary, although expressions/`exprs()` may seem slightly clunky and unintuitive to begin with, they allow for such power
and flexibility that they are a key part of the `{admiral}` package. For a comprehensive treatment of expressions, see 
[Chapter 18](https://adv-r.hadley.nz/expressions.html) of the Advanced R textbook.

> 

Author: addressed

---

> title: "Programming Concepts and Conventions"

Reviewer: What about this going in Advanced User Guides?.  I feel like after today's discussion we don't want to scare people away!!

Author: i'd rather not hide it more  (by p[lacing it further down) if at all possible. most of the material in this vignette is things that users do have to consider even if they are not hugely proficient in admiral yet.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we should restructure the "User Guides" menu. I think especially the "Advanced User Guides" section title is not helpful. What does "advanced" mean? For me it sounds like "this information is not required for the daily admiral usage". However, I would recommend reading "Programming Concepts and Conventions", "Date and Time Imputation", "General Derivations", and "Higher Order Functions" to everyone who is using admiral in a study.
What about the following menu?
### General Guides
- Programming Concepts and Conventions
- General Derivations
- Higher Order Functions
### ADaM Script Guides
- Creating an ADSL
- Creating an OCCDS ADaM
- Creating a BDS Findings ADAM
- Creating a BDS Exposure ADaM
- Creating a BDS Time-to-Event ADaM
- Creating Questionnaire ADaMs
- Creating a PK NCA or Population PK ADaM
- Creating a Hy's Law ADaM
### Special Topics Guides
- Date and Time Imputation
- Visit and Period Variables
- Queries Dataset Documentation
- Lab Grading
### FAQ
- FAQ

Reviewer: oooooohhhh this is lovely!!!  Do you mind restructuring this @manciniedoardo ?

Author: done!

output: rmarkdown::html_vignette
vignette: >
  %\VignetteIndexEntry{Programming Concepts and Conventions}
  %\VignetteEngine{knitr::rmarkdown}
  %\VignetteEncoding{UTF-8}
---

```{r setup, include = FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  collapse = TRUE,
  comment = "#>"
)

library(dplyr)
library(admiral)
library(admiraldev)
```

# Introduction

This vignette aims to discuss some of the common programming concepts and conventions that have been adopted within the

> `{admiral}` family of packages. It is intended to be a user-facing version of the [Programming Strategy](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiraldev/articles/programming_strategy.html) page, but users can also read the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`{admiral}` family of packages. It is intended to be a user-facing version of the [Programming Strategy](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiraldev/articles/programming_strategy.html) vignette, but users can also read the
```

latter after becoming more familiar with the package to expand further on any topics of interest. For some of common
`{admiral}` FAQ, visit the corresponding [FAQ page](faq.html).

# Input and Output

It is expected that the input dataset is not grouped. Otherwise an error is
issued.

The output dataset is ungrouped. The observations are not ordered in a dedicated
way. In particular, the order of the observations of the input dataset may not
be preserved.

# `{admiral}` Functions and Options

As a general principle, the behavior of the `{admiral}` functions is only determined by their input, not by any global object,
i.e. all inputs like datasets, variable names, options, etc. must be provided to the function by arguments. Correspondingly, the

> functions do not have any side-effects like creating or modifying global objects, printing, writing files, etc.

Reviewer: IS this true?  I thought some of the source stuff printed stuff?

Author: clarified that this is "in general"

```r
dm <- haven::read_sas("dm.sas7bdat") %>% 
  convert_blanks_to_na()
```

Note that any logical operator being applied to an `NA` value *always* returns `NA` rather than `TRUE` or `FALSE`.

```{r}
visits <- c("Baseline", NA, "Screening", "Week 1 Day 7")
visits != "Baseline"
```

The only exception is `is.na()` which returns `TRUE` if the input is `NA`.

```{r}
is.na(visits)
```

Thus, to filter all visits which are not `"Baseline"` the following condition would need to be used.

```{r}
visits != "Baseline" | is.na(visits)
```

Also note that most aggregation functions, like `mean()` or `max()`, also return `NA` if any element of the input vector is missing.

```{r}
mean(c(1, NA, 2))
```

To avoid this behavior one has to explicitly set `na.rm = TRUE`.

```{r}
mean(c(1, NA, 2), na.rm = TRUE)
```

This is very important to keep in mind when using `{admiral}`'s aggregation functions such as `derive_summary_records()`.

For handling of `NA`s in sorting variables see [Sort Order](generic.html#sort_order).

# Expressions in Scripts {#exprs}

## Quoting and Unquoting: Introducing `expr()`, `exprs()`, `!!` and `!!!`

### `expr()` and `exprs()`

> `expr()` is a function from the `{rlang}` package, which is used to an **expression**. The expression is not evaluated 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`expr()` is a function from the `{rlang}` package, which is used to create an **expression**. The expression is not evaluated 
```

- rather, it is passed on to the derivation function which evaluates it in its own environment. `exprs()` is the plural version of 
`expr()`, so it accepts multiple comma-separated items and returns a list of expressions. 

```{r, eval = TRUE}
library(rlang)

adae <- data.frame(USUBJID = "XXX-1", AEDECOD = "HEADACHE")

# Return the adae object
adae

# Return an expression
expr(adae)
```

When used within the contest of an `{admiral}` derivation function, `expr()` and `exprs()`  allow the function to evaluate the 
expressions in the context of the input dataset. As an example, `expr()` and `exprs()` allow users to pass variable names of datasets 
to the function without wrapping them in quotation marks. 

> The expressions framework is powerful because users are able to intuitively "inject code" into `admiral` functions
> (through the function parameters) using very similar syntax as if they were writing open code, with the exception possibly being an
> outer `exprs()` wrapper.  For instance, in the `derive_vars_merged()` call below, the user is merging `adsl` with `ex` and is able
> to filter `ex` prior to the merge using an expression passed to the `filter_add` parameter. Because `filter_add` accepts expressions, 
> the user has full power to filter their dataset as they please. In the same vein, the user is able to create any new variables they 
> wish after the merge using the `new_vars` argument, to which they pass a list of expressions containing "standard" R code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The expressions framework is powerful because users are able to intuitively "inject code" into `admiral` functions
(through the function parameters) using very similar syntax as if they were writing open code, with the exception possibly being an
outer `exprs()` wrapper.  For instance, in the `derive_vars_merged()` call below, the user is merging `ADSL` with `EX` and is able
to filter `EX` prior to the merge using an expression passed to the `filter_add` parameter. Because `filter_add` accepts expressions, 
the user has full power to filter their dataset as they please. In the same vein, the user is able to create any new variables they 
wish after the merge using the `new_vars` argument, to which they pass a list of expressions containing "standard" R code.
```

Author: again this portion is referencing the actual `adsl` and `ex` objects in the code rather than the general `ADSL` and `EX` datasets

  ),
  order = exprs(EXENDTM),
  mode = "last"
)
```

### Bang-Bang (`!!`) and Bang-Bang-Bang (`!!!`) {#unquoting}

Sometimes you may want to construct an expression using other, pre-existing expressions. However, it's not immediately clear how
to achieve this because expressions inherently pause evaluation of your code before it's executed:

```{r, eval = TRUE}
a <- expr(2)
b <- expr(3)

expr(a + b)
# NOT 2 + 3
```

This is where `!!` (bang-bang) comes in: provided again by the `{rlang}` package, it  allows you to inject the contents of an 
expression into another expression, meaning that by using `!!` you can modify the code inside an expression before R evaluates it.
By using `!!` you are **unquoting** an expression, i.e. evaluating it before you pass it onwards.

```{r, eval = TRUE}
expr(!!a + !!b)
```

You can see an example of where `!!` comes in handy within `{admiral}` code in [Common Pitfall 1](#pitfall1), where the contents of an expression is unquoted so that it can be passed to `derive_vars_merged()`.

`!!!` (bang-bang-bang) is the plural version of `!!` and can be used to unquote a list of expressions:

```{r, eval = TRUE}

> exprs(!!!list(a, b))

Reviewer: Do we use this anywhere for user-facing code?  Can we make example if so since we are talking about it.

```

Within `{admiral}`, this operator can be useful if we need to unquote a list of variables (stored as expressions) to use them inside
of an `{admiral}` or even `{dplyr}` call. One example is the `{admiral}` subject keys:

```{r, eval = TRUE}
get_admiral_option("subject_keys")
```

If we want to use the subject keys stored within this `{admiral}` option to subset a dataset, we need to use `!!!` to unquote this list.
Let's construct a dummy example to illustrate the point:

```{r, eval = TRUE, error = TRUE}
adcm <- data.frame(STUDYID = "XXX", USUBJID = "XXX-1", CMTRT = "ASPIRIN")
adcm

> # This doesn't work as we are not unquoting the subj ect keys

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# This doesn't work as we are not unquoting the subject keys
```

## Common pitfalls 

Expressions are very powerful, but this can also lead to misunderstandings about their functionality. Let's set up some dummy
data to explore common issues that new (or experienced!) programmers may encounter when dealing with expressions.

```{r, eval = TRUE, echo = TRUE}
library(dplyr, warn.conflicts = FALSE)
library(admiral)

vs <- tribble(
  ~USUBJID, ~VSTESTCD, ~VISIT, ~VSSTRESN, ~VSSTRESU, ~VSDTC,
  "01-1301", "WEIGHT", "SCREENING", 82.1, "kg", "2013-08-29",
  "01-1301", "WEIGHT", "WEEK 2", 81.19, "kg", "2013-09-15",
  "01-1301", "WEIGHT", "WEEK 4", 82.56, "kg", "2013-09-24",
  "01-1302", "BMI", "SCREENING", 20.1, "kg/m2", "2013-08-29",
  "01-1302", "BMI", "WEEK 2", 20.2, "kg/m2", "2013-09-15",
  "01-1302", "BMI", "WEEK 4", 19.9, "kg/m2", "2013-09-24"
)

dm <- tribble(
  ~USUBJID, ~AGE,
  "01-1301", 18
)
```

### 1. Mistakenly passing something that isn't an expression to an argument {#pitfall1}

When writing more complex `{admiral}` code it can be easy to mistakenly pass the wrong input to an argument that 

> expects an expression. For example, the code below fails because `my_expression` is not an expression - is 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
expects an expression. For example, the code below fails because `my_expression` is not an expression - it is 
```

)
```

To fix this code, we need to [unquote](#unquoting) `my_expression` so that the expression that it is holding is passed correctly
to `derive_vars_merged()`:

```{r, eval = TRUE, error = FALSE}
derive_vars_merged(
  dm,
  dataset_add = select(vs, USUBJID, VSTESTCD, VISIT),
  by_vars = exprs(USUBJID),
  filter_add = !!my_expression
)
```

### 2. Forgetting that expressions must be evaluable in the dataset

In a similar vein to above, even if an actual expression *is* passed as an argument, you must make
sure that it can be evaluated within the dataset of interest. This may seem trivial, but it is a common pitfall because
expressions delay evaluation of code and so can delay the identification of issues. For instance, consider this example:

```{r, eval = TRUE, error = TRUE}
filter_vs_and_merge <- function(my_expression) {
  derive_vars_merged(
    dm,
    dataset_add = select(vs, USUBJID, VSTESTCD, VISIT),
    by_vars = exprs(USUBJID),
    filter_add = !!my_expression
  )
}

# This works
filter_vs_and_merge(expr(VSTESTCD == "WEIGHT" & VISIT == "SCREENING"))

# This fails
filter_vs_and_merge(expr(VSTESTCD == "WEIGHT" & VISIT == "SCREENING" & VSTPT == "PREDOSE"))
```

> The second call fails because hidden within the expression is a mention of `VSTPT`, which is a variable missing from `vs`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The second call fails because hidden within the expression is a mention of `VSTPT`, which was dropped from `vs` in `filter_vs_and_merge()`.
```

adcm

# This doesn't work as we are not unquoting the subject keys
adcm %>% select(get_admiral_option("subject_keys"))

# This works because we are unquoting the subject keys
adcm %>% select(!!!get_admiral_option("subject_keys"))
```

You can see another example of `!!!` in action in [this line](https://github.com/pharmaverse/admiral/blob/c5dd8fb196c2cd3f27a6b02ec88fa1abd6b24d60/inst/templates/ad_adex.R#L162) of the
`{admiral}` `ADEX` template script, where it is used to dynamically control the by variables passed to an `{admiral}` function.

### Summary

In summary, although the expressions framework may seem slightly clunky and mysterious to begin with, it allows for such power
and flexibility that it forms a key part of the `{admiral}` package. For a comprehensive treatment of expressions, see 
[Chapter 18](https://adv-r.hadley.nz/expressions.html) and [Chapter 19](https://adv-r.hadley.nz/quasiquotation.html) of the Advanced R textbook. Chapter 19 specifically covers in much more detail the concept of unquoting.

## Common pitfalls 

Expressions are very powerful, but this can also lead to misunderstandings about their functionality. Let's set up some dummy

> data to explore common issues that new (or experienced!) programmers may encounter when dealing with expressions.

Reviewer 3: sneaky little hobbit's comment: are only programmers using {admiral} ? or could it be more general with "users" instead?

Author: i think if you are using admiral you are programming, so happy to keep 😄
